.\"	$NetBSD: undist.1,v 1.1 2026/06/11 19:51:16 rumble Exp $
.Dd December 26, 2025
.Dt UNDIST 1 sgimips
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm undist
.Nd unpack, list, or verify SGI dist archives
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Oo Fl l Ns \&| Ns Fl v Ns \&| Ns Fl x Oc
.Op Fl aopst
.Op Fl m Ar machtype
.Op Fl P Ar prefix
.Ar dist.idb
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
unpacks SGI dist archives, which are found on IRIX installation
media.
.Pp
.Nm
runs in one of three mutually exclusive modes:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Fl l
List the archive's contents without extracting.
.It Fl v
Verify the archive's contents by calculating and comparing checksums
(after decompressing, if necessary), without saving any files.
.It Fl x
Extract the archive's contents.
.El
.Pp
The following flags augment one or more of the above modes:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Fl a
Allow extraction to an absolute path. Otherwise, files are extracted
relative to the current working directory.
.It Fl m Ar machtype
Extract only files whose 'mach' field in the idb file exactly match the
given string.
.It Fl o
Ignore offset fields in the .idb file and compute each manually. Mainly
for testing.
.It Fl p
Allow extraction to relative paths such as '../'. Otherwise, relative
paths are munged such that files are extracted only within the current
working directory and subdirectories thereof.
.It Fl P Ar prefix
Only extract files whose names begin with the given prefix. There
is currently no globbing support.
.It Fl s
Skip extraction errors and try to continue. Otherwise, fails immediately
when an error is encountered.
.It Fl t
Extract using the temporary file path in the .idb file instead of the
destination file path.
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
Extract all contents from a dist into the current working directory:
.Bd -literal -offset indent -compact
undist -x /mnt/dist/eoe1.idb
.Ed
.Pp
List all contents in a dist:
.Bd -literal -offset indent -compact
undist -l /mnt/dist/eoe1.idb
.Ed
.Pp
Verify sizes and checksums of all files in a dist:
.Bd -literal -offset indent -compact
undist -v /mnt/dist/eoe1.idb
.Ed
.Pp
Extract a single file from a dist:
.Bd -literal -offset indent -compact
undist -x -P usr/etc/audio/hdsp.lod /mnt/dist/dmedia_eoe.idb
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr haud 4 ,
.Xr haudfw 1
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
utility first appeared in
.Nx 12 .
