.\" $NetBSD: pbbat.4,v 1.1 2025/04/03 01:54:46 nat Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2025 Nathaial Sloss <nathanialsloss@yahoo.com.au>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2002, 2004, 2010 The NetBSD Foundation, Inc.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE NETBSD FOUNDATION, INC. AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED
.\" TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE FOUNDATION OR CONTRIBUTORS
.\" BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd March 28, 2025
.Dt PBBAT 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm pbbat
.Nd PowerBook 1xx Battery and AC adaptor
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "pbbat* at aed?"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver supports
.Tn PowerBook
1xx batteries and AC adaptors.
.Pp
The battery and adaptor status are made available through the
.Xr envsys 4
.Tn API .
The battery information can be displayed also with the
.Xr envstat 8
command:
.Bd -literal -offset 2n
$ envstat
                Current  CritMax  WarnMax  WarnMin  CritMin Unit
[AC Adaptor]
     connected:    TRUE
[pbbat0]
       present:    TRUE
design voltage:   6.000                                        V
       voltage:   7.267                                        V
    design cap:  60.000                                       Wh
 last full cap:     N/A
        charge:  47.910                      3.674%   2.799%  Wh (47.91%)
   charge rate:     N/A
discharge rate:   5.641                                        W
      charging:    TRUE
  charge state:  NORMAL
.Ed
.Sh EVENTS
The
.Nm
driver is able to send events to
.Xr powerd 8
daemon when a capacity state has been changed.
The new state will be reported as the
.Em fourth
argument to the
.Pa /etc/powerd/scripts/sensor_battery
script.
If a custom capacity limit was set via
.Xr envstat 8 ,
the
.Nm
driver will report a
.Em user-capacity
event to the same script when current capacity limit has been reached.
AC Adaptor events are passed to the
.Pa /etc/powerd/scripts/acadaptor
script as pressed and released events when power is connected or disconnected
respectively.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr adb 4 ,
.Xr envsys 4 ,
.Xr envstat 8 ,
.Xr powerd 8
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Nathanial Sloss
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver appeared in
.Nx 11 .
.Sh BUGS
This driver currently only supports the
.Tn PowerBook
100 series batteries excluding the 150 and 190 computers.
.Pp
The design capacity is an approximation of charge based on a new battery.
.Pp
The charge and discharge rates are approximations between successive reads of
the battery capacity and should not be relied upon for accurate running time
calculations.
