.\"	$NetBSD: haud.4,v 1.1 2026/06/11 07:48:07 rumble Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2025 The NetBSD Foundation, Inc.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This document is derived from work contributed to The NetBSD Foundation
.\" by Steve Rumble.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE NETBSD FOUNDATION, INC. AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED
.\" TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE FOUNDATION OR CONTRIBUTORS BE
.\" LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd December 25, 2025
.Dt HAUD 4 sgimips
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm haud
.Nd SGI Hollywood Audio Processor
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "haud0 at hpc0 offset 0x180"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
is the driver for the audio processor found on Iris Indigo machines (IP12,
IP20). The same hardware is available on IP12 Personal Iris machines (4D/3x),
with components split across the mainboard and the "Magnum Audio" option card.
The processor apparently went by various other names such as "(Iris) Audio
Processor" and "Hollywood DSP" in IRIX and the PROM.
.Pp
The core of Hollywood Audio is a Motorola DSP 56001 processor, which sits
in front of audio input and output circuitry and uses
.Xr sgimips/hpc 4
to read and write 16-bit audio streams via circular buffers in main memory.
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver requires DSP firmware to operate. No open source firmware exists, so
this driver currently requires IRIX's proprietary hdsp.lod.
.Nm
attempts to load the firmware using
.Xr firmload 9
when the audio device is first opened.
.Pp
Because the firmware is proprietary and not licensed for distribution, it is
not included with NetBSD. It must be pulled from an IRIX installation CD or
from an installed IRIX filesystem, converted into a loadable binary, and
placed in a
.Xr firmload 9
directory as "haud/hdsp.bin".
.Sh FIRMWARE INSTALLATION
The following example pulls the IRIX hdsp.lod firmware from an install CD's
EFS filesystem, converts it into a loadable binary blob with
.Xr haudfw 1 ,
and makes the blob available for loading by the kernel:
.Bd -literal -offset indent -compact
cd /tmp
svhlabel -w /dev/cd0
mount /dev/cd0a /mnt
undist -x -P usr/etc/audio/hdsp.lod /mnt/dist/dmedia_eoe.idb
mkdir /libdata/firmware/haud
haudfw usr/etc/audio/hdsp.lod /libdata/firmware/haud/hdsp.bin
.Ed
.Pp
In IRIX 6.5, the dmedia_eoe dist is found on the "Foundation 1"
disc (SGI part number 812-0759-002). In IRIX 6.2 it is found on the
first install CD (812-0469-001). In 5.3 it is on the one and only
install CD.
.Pp
In older IRIX releases, hdsp.lod may be in a different dist. For example,
in 4.0.5H it is found in eoe1 instead of dmedia_eoe. So the above undist
command would change to:
.Bd -literal -offset indent -compact
undist -x -P usr/etc/audio/hdsp.lod /mnt/dist/eoe1.idb
.Ed
.Sh SUPPORTED FIRMWARE
.Nm
was developed with the following firmware:
.Bd -literal -offset indent -compact
cksum -a md5 hdsp.lod
MD5 (hdsp.lod) = 798b2bff0a0726e12afddd07273d5814
.Ed
.Pp
This version of the firmware was distributed with IRIX from at least version
5.3 up through 6.5. Older firmwares may also work but are untested.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr sgimips/haudfw 1
.Xr sgimips/undist 1
.Xr sgimips/hpc 4
.Xr firmload 9
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Nx 12.0 .
.Sh CAVEATS
Only basic playback is supported.
.Pp
The driver relies on the MI
.Xr audio 9
layer for mixing even though the DSP is capable of mixing multiple output
streams automatically.
