.\"	$NetBSD$
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2025 The NetBSD Foundation, Inc.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
R.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE NETBSD FOUNDATION, INC. AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED
.\" TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE FOUNDATION OR CONTRIBUTORS
.\" BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.Dd November 30, 2025
.Dt VIAPCIB 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm viapcib
.Nd VIA PCI-ISA bridge with SMBus, and Power Management Subsystem."
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "viapcib* at pci? dev ? function ?"
.Cd "viasmb* at viapcib?"
.Cd "viaenv* at viapcib?"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver supports
.Tn VIA
VT8233, VT8233A, VT8233C, VT8235, VT8237(R), VT8237A, VT8237S, VT8251, VT8261,
CX700(M/M2), VX700, VX800, VX855, VX900 and VX11 South Bridges and Media System
Processors.
This device contains a number of components, including a PCI-ISA bridge.
.Pp
The driver attaches viasmb(4) driver for the SMBus host interface, which can be
used with the iic(4) framework.
Older southbridges provides this functionality through the viaenv(4) driver.
.Pp
The driver attaches the viaenv(4) driver for the PM counter, but it is disabled
by default, since it attaches through the acpi(4) interface.
.Pp
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr iic 4 ,
.Xr envsys 4 ,
.Xr envstat 8 ,
.Xr viaenv 4 ,
.Xr viapcib 4 ,
.Xr viasmb 4
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
device appeared in
.Nx 4.0 .
