.\"	$NetBSD: adt7462sm.4,v 1.1 2026/06/03 15:20:32 jdc Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2026 The NetBSD Foundation, Inc.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This code is derived from software contributed to The NetBSD Foundation
.\" by Julian Coleman.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE NETBSD FOUNDATION, INC. AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED
.\" TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE FOUNDATION OR CONTRIBUTORS
.\" BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd February 19, 2026
.Dt ADT7462SM 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm adt7462sm
.Nd On Semiconductor (Analog Devices) ADT7462 Flexible Temperature,
Voltage Monitor, and System Fan Controller
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "adt7462sm* at iic? addr?"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for the On Semiconductor ADT7462 system monitor.
The chip possesses 8 fan speed sensors, 4 temperature sensors,
and 13 voltage sensors.
The number of each sensor type configured by the driver depends on the
chip configuration.
.Pp
The values of the sensors are made available through the
.Xr envstat 8
interface.
.Bl -column ".Li fan fault" "mV DC" -offset indent
.It Sy Sensor     Ta Sy Units  Ta Sy Description
.It Li fan Ar N      Ta RPM    Ta Fan 0\^\(en7
.It Li local         Ta C      Ta Local temperature
.It Li remote Ar N   Ta C      Ta Remote temperature 1\(en3
.It Li V2.5 Ar N     Ta mV DC  Ta 2.5V voltage 1\(en3
.It Li V1.8 Ar N     Ta mV DC  Ta 1.8V voltage 1\(en3
.It Li V1.5 Ar N     Ta mV DC  Ta 1.5V voltage 1\(en4
.It Li V3.3 Ar N     Ta mV DC  Ta 3.3V voltage 1\(en2
.It Li V1.2 Ar N     Ta mV DC  Ta 1.2V voltage 1\(en2
.It Li Vbatt         Ta mV DC  Ta Battery voltage
.It Li V12 Ar N      Ta mV DC  Ta 12V voltage 1\(en3
.It Li V0.9          Ta mV DC  Ta 0.9V voltage
.It Li V1.25         Ta mV DC  Ta 1.25V voltage
.It Li V5            Ta mV DC  Ta 5V voltage
.It Li fan fault     Ta none   Ta Fan fault display
.El
.Pp
Configurable limits for the sensors are also available via
.Xr envstat 8 .
Initial limit values are read from the chip.
Each temperature sensor has therm, high and low limits, which are
mapped to
.Fa critmax ,
.Fa warnmax
and
.Fa warnmin ,
respectively.
Voltage sensors have high
.Pq Fa warnmax
and low
.Pq Fa warnmin
limits.
Fan sensors have a high limit mapped to
.Fa warnmin ,
because the fan measurements are revolution intervals, so higher
numbers correlate to lower fan speeds.
Note, that there are two therm limits per temperature sensor
and the one with the lowest value is used as
.Fa critmax .
The fan fault sensor has a value of
.Em 0
in normal operation.
If a fault is detected, the fan fault value will represent the numbers
of the failed fans,
.Em 1
for fan 0,
.Em 10
for fan 1, and so on, to
.Em 10000000
for fan 8.
.Pp
The chip also supports Pulse-Width Modulated (PWM) fan speed control and the
.Nm
driver
makes PWM and temperature settings available via
.Xr sysctl 8 .
For each PWM channel, the controlling temperature channel is shown.
For example:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
hw.adt7462sm0.pwm1.channel = remote1_dynamic
hw.adt7462sm0.pwm2.channel = remote2_dynamic
hw.adt7462sm0.pwm3.channel = remote3
hw.adt7462sm0.pwm4.channel = manual
.Ed
.Pp
If the channel is shown as
.Dq manual ,
then the PWM duty cycle can be altered through the corresponding
.Fa duty_cycle
variable.  For example:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
hw.adt7462sm0.pwm4.duty_cycle = 12
.Ed
.Pp
The
.Fa duty cycle
can be set to any value between 0% (off) and 100% (full) although the
minimum non-zero value for a fan is usually in the 20% to 33% range.
.Pp
If the channel is shown as
.Dq remoteN ,
then the.
.Fa tmin
and
.Fa trange
variables for that
.Dq remoteN
can be used to adjust the PWM value and fan speed.
For example:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
hw.adt7462sm0.remote3.tmin = 40
hw.adt7462sm0.remote3.trange = 32
.Ed
.Pp
The
.Fa tmin
value is the temperature in degC at which the fan starts and the
.Fa trange
value represents the temperature range over which the fan speed
increases until it reaches full speed.
Both of these values can be altered, although
.Fa tmin
must be lower than the corresponding
.Fa critmax
value from
.Xr envstat
and
.Fa trange
must be between 2 and 80.
.Pp
If the channel is shown as
.Dq remoteN_dynamic ,
then the
.Fa tmin
value is read-only,
and the
.Fa trange
and
.Fa oppoint
variables for that
.Dq remoteN
are used to adjust the PWM value and fan speed.
For example:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
hw.adt7462sm0.remote1.tmin = 40
hw.adt7462sm0.remote1.trange = 32
hw.adt7462sm0.remote1.oppoint = 60
.Ed
.Pp
The
.Fa tmin
value is still the temperature in degC at which the fan starts, but is
dynamically calculated by the chip based on the
.Fa oppoint
(operating point)
and
.Fa trange
values.
The operating point is a target temperature and the chip will attempt
to maintain that temperature or lower.
It does this by adjusting the
.Fa tmin
value based on the
.Fa trange ,
thus causing the PWM values and fan speed to vary based on the difference
between the current and operating point temperatures.
Both the
.Fa oppoint
and
.Fa trange
values can be altered, although
.Fa oppoint
must be higher than
.Fa tmin .
.Pp
If the channel is shown as
.Dq local_remote3 ,
then
.Fa tmin
and
.Fa trange
for both the
.Dq local
and the
.Dq remote3
temperature sensors affect the PWM value and fan speed.
.Pp
If the channel is shown as
.Dq off ,
then it can not be altered.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr iic 4 ,
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr envstat 8 ,
.Xr sysctl 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Nx 11.1 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Julian Coleman Aq Mt jcoleman@NetBSD.org .
.Sh BUGS
It's not possible to determine if either a sensor is not connected,
or the monitored device is producing no output.
Therefore, unconnected sensors will show outputs of 0.
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver does not support interrupt output.
