.\" $NetBSD: ds28e17iic.4,v 1.1 2025/01/23 19:02:42 brad Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2025 Brad Spencer <brad@anduin.eldar.org>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.Dd January 12, 2025
.Dt DS28E17IIC 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ds28e17iic
.Nd Driver for Maxim DS28E17 1-Wire to I2C bridge
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "ds28e17iic* at onewire?"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides a 1-Wire to I2C bridge with a
.Xr iic 4
bus at the far end using the DS28E17 bridge chip.
.Pp
The DS28E17 will automatically detect and deal with a end device that
uses I2C clock stretching.
.Sh SYSCTL VARIABLES
The following
.Xr sysctl 3
variables are provided:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Li hw.ds28e17iic0.readycount
.It Li hw.ds28e17iic0.readydelay
When the driver sends a transaction down the 1-Wire bus, these
variables are how long to delay before reading the status on whether
or not the conversion is done and the number of times to perform this
read back.  In general, these values should be as short as possible,
but if there are too short, a EAGAIN timeout will occur when the end
device is just taking a longer than expect amount of time to respond.
This may be particularly noticed if end device is doing clock
stretching.
.It Li hw.ds28e17iic0.reportreadnostop
If set to 1, report that an attempt to do a Read without a Stop
occured.  The chip does not support that operation.  Read without Stop
will be treated as a Read with a Stop with the hope that the end
device will be able to deal with that.
.It Li hw.ds28e17iic0.reportzerolen
If set to 1, report that an attempt to perform a zero length read or
zero length write occured.  The chip does not support zero length
reads or writes.
.It Li hw.ds28e17iic0.debug
If the driver is compiled with
.Dv DS28E17IIC_DEBUG ,
this node will appear and can be used to set the debugging level.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr onewire 4 ,
.Xr iic 4 ,
.Xr sysctl 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Nx 11.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Brad Spencer Aq Mt brad@anduin.eldar.org .
.Sh BUGS
While this may not be considered a bug, the DS28E17 chip will detach
itself from the
.Xr onewire 4
bus if there is not a device connected to its SDA and SCL pins.
.Pp
The
.Xr i2cscan 8
command will not function entirely correctly when run against a
DS28E17 chip.  The default mode of doing a I2C Write with Stop that is
zero length is not supported by the DS28E17 chip.  When the
.Xr i2cscan 8
command is used with its one byte read mode it will find devices as
long as the device does not NACK on a I2C read.

