.\" $NetBSD: emcfan.4,v 1.1 2025/03/11 13:56:46 brad Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2025 Brad Spencer <brad@anduin.eldar.org>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.Dd Feburary 19, 2025
.Dt EMCFAN 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm emcfan
.Nd Driver for the Microchip Technology EMC210x and EMC230x fan controllers
via I2C bus
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "emcfan* at iic? addr 0x2c"
.Cd "emcfan* at iic? addr 0x2d"
.Cd "emcfan* at iic? addr 0x2e"
.Cd "emcfan* at iic? addr 0x2f"
.Cd "emcfan* at iic? addr 0x4c"
.Cd "emcfan* at iic? addr 0x4d"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver support the EMC210x family with the following models:
EMC2101, EMC2101-R, EMC2103-1, EMC2103-2, EMC2103-4, EMC2104, and EMC2106
and for the EMC230x family with the following models:
EMC2301, EMC2302, EMC2303, and EMC2305.  All chips have one or more tachometers,
and some of the chips have a number of temperature sensors and GPIO.
The
.Nm
driver provides
.Xr envsys 4
framework measurements for the RPM as determined by the tachometers.  If the chip
has temperature sensors, the
.Xr envsys 4
framework will provide an entry for every possible temperature sensor that a
particular chip can support.  GPIO support is provided by
.Xr gpio 4
framework and the pins can be accessed with the
.Xr gpioctl 8
command.
.Pp
The EMC fan controllers are arranged as a set of registers.  These registers are accessed
by a /dev device per attached chip.  The program
.Xr emcfanctl 8
makes use of this device and allows all valid registers for particular chip to be read or
written and provides some higher level commands that allow the drive level and frequency
divider for a particular fan to be adjusted.
.Sh GPIO
The EMC2103-2, EMC2103-4, EMC2104 and EMC2106 chips have gpio pins.
For the EMC2103-2 and EMC2103-4, these pins are only gpio and are not
shared with any other function.
For the EMC2104 and EMC2106, the following is how
the pins maps to the altN flags in the
.Xr gpio 4
framework.
.TS
box tab(:);
l | l | l
= | = | =
l | l | l
- | - | -
l | l | l
- | - | -
l | l | l
- | - | -
l | l | l
- | - | -
l | l | l.
Pin:ALT0:ALT1
GPIO1:CLK_IN: -
GPIO2:TACH2: -
GPIO3:PWM2: -
GPIO4:OVERT2#:PWM3
GPIO5:OVERT3#:PWM4
.TE
.Pp
.Sh SYSCTL VARIABLES
The following
.Xr sysctl 8
variables are provided:
.Bl -tag -width Li
.It Li hw.emcfan0.debug
If the driver is compiled with
.Dv EMCFAN_DEBUG ,
this node will appear and can be used to set the debugging level.
.It Li hw.emcfan0.poles<n>
For a number of the chips in the two chip families, the tachometer
calcuation algorithm needs to know the number of poles that the
tachometer has in order to calculate the RPM correctly.
Usually this will be 2, but if the situation is otherwise, set this
node to the number of poles that the particular fan has.
The calculation is also effected by the number of edges present in the tachometer signal.
The number of edges is set with the
.Xr emcfanctl 8
command.
.It Li hw.emcfan0.ftach
Many of the chips in the two famlies have a pin that can be used to
drive an alternative 32.767khz clock for the tachometers.
The EMC2103-1, EMC2103-2 and EMC2103-4 does not have this alternative
clock pin, and while it is likely that the chip is running at the
default 32.000khz, it might not be.
This variable lets one set an alternative clock.
The units for this node are in hz.
.It Li hw.emcfan0.vin4_temp_zone
The EMC2104 and EMC2106 have a special temperature sensor pin called VIN4, if this sensor is wired up,
then this variable can be set to 1 and meaningful values will appear in the
.Xr envsys 4
framework.
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width Pa -compact
.It Pa /dev/emcfan Ns Ar u
The device unit
.Ar u
file.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr emcfanctl 8 ,
.Xr envsys 4 ,
.Xr iic 4 ,
.Xr envstat 8 ,
.Xr sysctl 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Nx 11.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Brad Spencer Aq Mt brad@anduin.eldar.org .
.Sh BUGS
The driver does not support the EMC2105 chip.
.Pp
While not exactly a bug, the driver does nothing with the alert
interrupts that can be generated from many of the chips.  It would be
more typical for this to be tied to a GPIO pin which can interrupt
using CPU interrupts.
