.\"	$NetBSD: radeonfb.4,v 1.1 2025/04/15 07:55:51 nia Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2025 The NetBSD Foundation
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING,
.\" BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED
.\" AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY,
.\" OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd April 14, 2025
.Dt RADEONFB 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm radeonfb
.Nd ATI Radeon framebuffer driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "radeonfb* at pci?"
.Cd "wsdisplay* at radeonfb?"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for ATI Radeon GPUs.
The driver provides backlight control on laptops via
.Xr wsconsctl 8 ,
as well as 2D acceleration for
.Xr rasops 9
operations.
.Pp
This driver is primarily used on architectures without support for
.Xr drm 4 .
On newer systems,
.Xr radeondrm 4
can be used to take advantage of full hardware acceleration.
.Sh HARDWARE
The following chipsets should work:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width Ds -offset indent -compact
.It Radeon VE / Radeon 7000 (RV100)
.It Radeon 7500, 7500 LE (RV200)
.It Radeon 8500, 8500 LE (R200)
.It Radeon 9000, 9000 Pro (RV250)
.It Radeon 9100 (RS350)
.It Radeon 9200 / 9200 SE (RV280)
.It Radeon 9250 (RV280)
.It Radeon 9500 / 9500 Pro (R300)
.It Radeon 9600 / 9600 Pro (RV350)
.It Radeon 9700 / 9700 Pro (R300)
.It Radeon 9800 / 9800 XL (R350)
.It Radeon X600 Pro (RV380)
.It Radeon X300 / Radeon X550 (RV370)
.It Mobility Radeon 9000 (RV250)
.It Mobility Radeon 9200 (RV280)
.It Mobility Radeon 9500 (RV360)
.It Mobility Radeon 9550 (RV360)
.It Mobility Radeon 9600 (RV350)
.It Mobility Radeon X600 (RV380)
.It Mobility Radeon X300 (RV370)
.It FireMV 2400 (RV380)
.El
.Pp
Note that this list is likely incomplete.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr radeon 4 ,
.Xr wscons 4 ,
.Xr wsdisplay 4
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Nx 4.0 .
.Sh CAVEATS
ATI Technologies Inc. ("ATI") has not assisted in the creation of, and
does not endorse, this software.
ATI will not be responsible or liable for any actual or alleged damage
or loss caused by or in connection with the use of or reliance on this
software.
