.\" $NetBSD: umcpmio.4,v 1.9 2025/12/26 22:17:27 uwe Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2024, 2025 Brad Spencer <brad@anduin.eldar.org>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.ds MCP2221 MCP2221\|/\|MCP2221A
.
.Dd November 13, 2025
.Dt UMCPMIO 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm umcpmio
.Nd Microchip Technologies MCP2210, \*[MCP2221] multi-io bridge
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "umcpmio* at uhidev? reportid ?"
.Cd "gpio* at gpiobus?"
.Cd "spi* at umcpmio?"
.Cd "iic* at umcpmio?        # or"
.Cd "iic* at i2cbus?"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for the MCP2210 and \*[MCP2221]
multi-io bridge chips.
The MCP2210 provides 9 simple gpio pins with multiple functions
that attach as a
.Xr gpio 4
device and the ability to do SPI via the
.Xr spi 4
framework.
The pins function as
.Xr gpio 4
pins or as chip select for the
.Xr spi 4
function.
The MCP2221 provides 4 simple gpio pins with multiple functions
that attach as a
.Xr gpio 4
device, an I2C port that attaches as an
.Xr iic 4
device and a UART serial port that attaches using
.Xr umodem 4
as a normal
.Xr ucom 4
.Pa ttyU Ns Ar \&*
device.
The UART is presented as one USB function, while the GPIO and I2C pins
are presented as a second HID USB function.
.Ss GPIO on the MCP2210
There are 9 basic gpio pins available with the following functions:
.Bd -filled
.TS
box tab(:);
l | l | l | l | l | l | l | l | l | l
= | = | = | = | = | = | = | = | = | =
l | l | l | l | l | l | l | l | l | l
l | l | l | l | l | l | l | l | l | l
l | l | l | l | l | l | l | l | l | l
l | l | l | l | l | l | l | l | l | l
l | l | l | l | l | l | l | l | l | l
l | l | l | l | l | l | l | l | l | l
l | l | l | l | l | l | l | l | l | l.
Assignment:GP0:GP1:GP2:GP3:GP4:GP5:GP6:GP7:GP8
GPIO:I/O:I/O:I/O:I/O:I/O:I/O:I/O:I/O:I
ALT0:CS:CS:CS:CS:CS:CS:CS:CS:-
ALT3:-:-:SSPND:SPI activity:LOWPWR:USBCFG:Falling edge:Release ACK:Release REQ
ALT4:-:-:-:-:-:-:Rising edge:-:-
ALT5:-:-:-:-:-:-:Low pulse:-:-
ALT6:-:-:-:-:-:-:High pulse:-:-
.TE
.Ed
.Pp
The IRQ counter on GP6 can be read with a
.Xr sysctl 8 .
The manor in which the GP6 IRQ counter detects the event is configured
by setting it to ALT3 to ALT6.
GP8 is only an input pin when configured for gpio purposes.
The chip select, CS, function will be enabled automatically if a
request to use the
.Xr spi 4
framework is performed that requests the use of the associated chip
select pin.
.
.Ss SPI
The MCP2210 supports a basic SPI engine via the
.Xr spi 4
framework.
Various SPI delays are configured with
.Xr umcpmioctl 8 .
.Pp
The SPI engine on the MCP2210 only functions in full duplex mode.
That is, it is not possible to just send bytes without also receiving
them.
The driver will queue up any recived bytes that might have come though
on a transaction and present them to the upstream layer from the queue
when asked.
This queue will be cleared out for a particular slave address when a
configuration call is made against a particular slave device.
.Pp
Upon making a configuration call to the
.Nm
driver, the driver will set the pin associated with the requested
slave address to ALT0.
Since the
.Xr spi 4
framework does not support the notion of a session, this pin will
never be reset by the
.Nm
driver.
Further, it is entirely possible to use
.Xr gpioctl 8
to change the pin assignment in such a way that SPI no longer works as
it is also not possible to know if a pin is in use at any moment in
time.
.Ss EEPROM
The MCP2210 has 256 bytes of EEPROM available via the
.Pa /dev/umcpmio0EEP
device.
Random reads and writes may be performed against this device, but
there can only one one opener at a time.
.Ss GPIO on the MCP2221
There are 4 basic gpio pins available with the following functions:
.Bd -filled -offset indent
.TS
box tab(:);
l | l | l | l | l
= | = | = | = | =
l | l | l | l | l
l | l | l | l | l
l | l | l | l | l
l | l | l | l | l.
Assignment:GP0:GP1:GP2:GP3
GPIO:I/O:I/O:I/O:I/O
ALT0:UART RX:ADC1:ADC2:ADC3
ALT1:-:UART TX:DAC1:DAC2
ALT2:-:IRQ:-:-
ALT3:SSPND:Clock output:USBCFG:I2C activity
.TE
.Ed
.Pp
ADC1, ADC2 and ADC3 are independent of each other and each 10 bits in
length.
To utilize one of the ADC pins, an
.Xr open 2
is performed against
.Pa /dev/umcpmio0GP1 ,
.Pa /dev/umcpmio0GP2
or
.Pa /dev/umcpmio0GP3
with only the
.Dv O_RDONLY
flag set.
Reads against the open file descriptor will produce
.Vt uint16_t
values.
.Pp
There is actually only one DAC present in the chip, but it is mirrored
to GP2 and GP3 if the pin is set to ALT1.
The DAC is 5 bits in length, and to use it, an
.Xr open 2
is performed against
.Pa /dev/umcpmio0GP2
or
.Pa /dev/umcpmio0GP3
with only the
.Dv O_WRONLY
flag set.
Writes of
.Vt uint8_t
bytes to the file descriptor will result in an analog signal being
created on the output pin.
.Pp
The clock output is derived from the USB clock of 48MHz.
The duty cycle and clock divider can be adjusted with
.Xr sysctl 8
variables.
To utilize GP1 as the clock output, the ALT3 function can be set with
.Xr gpioctl 8
command.
.Ss I2C
The \*[MCP2221] supports a hardware I2C port with a simple
scripting engine.
When the driver attaches, the I2C speed is set to 100Kb/s.
The ability to perform an I2C READ without a STOP is not supported by
the \*[MCP2221] engine and the driver turns a READ without STOP into a
READ with STOP.
This behavior is just an attempt to allow a device to function, and it
may not work for any particular device.
In particular, it is known that the
.Xr ds2482ow 4
device will not work as expected.
.Pp
The \*[MCP2221] chip will automatically detect and deal with a
device that uses I2C clock stretching.
.Ss UART
The UART on the \*[MCP2221] utilizes the
.Xr umodem 4
driver.
The UART function of the chip only supports
.Tn 8-N-1
communications.
.Sh SYSCTL VARIABLES
The following
.Xr sysctl 3
variables are provided:
.
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width Li -compact
.
.It Li hw.umcpmio0.debug
.It Li hw.umcpmio0.dump_buffers
If
.Dv UMCPMIO_DEBUG
is defined, additional debugging output can be enabled.
.
.Pp
.It Li hw.umcpmio0.response_wait
.It Li hw.umcpmio0.response_errcnt
This is how long the driver will wait for a HID response to come back
from the chip.
This variable is in microseconds and defaults to 2500.
The driver will only allow
.Li response_errcnt
number of errors when waiting for a response from a HID report.
This includes timeouts due to exceeding
.Li response_wait .
.
.El
.
.Ss MCP2210
.Bl -tag -width Li -compact
.
.It Li hw.umcpmio0.spi.verbose
Enable or disable verbose connection reset messages when there are
errors.
.
.Pp
.It Li hw.umcpmio0.spi.busy_delay
When the MCP2210 is busy, use busy_delay number of ms to wait before
trying the operation again.
The default is 0 as there usually will not be any reason is wait.
.
.Pp
.It Li hw.umcpmio0.spi.retry_busy_chipdrain
.It Li hw.umcpmio0.spi.retry_busy_transfer
The number of times to retry either a chipdrain or transfer operation.
A chipdrain is used when the chip has sent back data, but the upstream
is not ready for it yet.
A transfer is a normal SPI transfer.
.
.Pp
.It Li hw.umcpmio0.gpio.counter
.It Li hw.umcpmio0.gpio.reset_counter
When the GP6 pin is set to ALT3 to ALT6, this sysctl reads back the
counter.
To reset the counter write 1 to the reset_counter sysctl.
The counter will also be reset if any pin changes from a input or
output pin to one of the ALT functions or vise versa.
The trigger for this could be the use of
.Xr gpioctl 8
or if the pin is changed to become a CS from a general I/O pin for the
.Xr spi 4
infrastructure.
.El
.
.Ss \*[MCP2221]
.Bl -tag -width Li -compact
.
.It Li hw.umcpmio0.i2c.reportreadnostop
Report on the console if a driver attempts to use an I2C READ without
STOP.
A READ without STOP is not supported by the \*[MCP2221] I2C
engine and will be turned into a READ with STOP by the driver.
.
.Pp
.It Li hw.umcpmio0.i2c.busy_delay
The driver checks in a number of cases if the I2C engine is busy and
will wait for
.Li busy_delay
microseconds before checking again.
.
.Pp
.It Li hw.umcpmio0.i2c.retry_busy_read
The number of times to try to do an I2C READ when the engine is busy.
.
.Pp
.It Li hw.umcpmio0.i2c.retry_busy_write
The number of times to try to do an I2C WRITE when the engine is busy.
.
.Pp
.It Li hw.umcpmio0.gpio.clock_duty_cycle
.It Li hw.umcpmio0.gpio.clock_divider
When GP1 is configured to use function ALT3, it will output a clock
pulse.
The valid values for
.Li clock_duty_cycle
are
.Ql 75% ,
.Ql 50% ,
.Ql 25% ,
and
.Ql \^0% .
That is, 75% of the time a high and 25% of the time a low will be
present on the GP1 pin.
The valid values for
.Li clock_divider
are
.Ql 375kHz ,
.Ql 750kHz ,
.Ql 1.5MHz ,
.Ql 3MHz ,
.Ql 6MHz ,
.Ql 12MHz ,
and
.Ql 24MHz .
.
.Pp
.It Li hw.umcpmio0.dac.vref
.It Li hw.umcpmio0.adc.vref
Sets the VREF value for the DAC or ADC.
The valid values are
.Ql 4.096V ,
.Ql 2.048V ,
.Ql 1.024V ,
.Ql OFF ,
and
.Ql VDD .
.
.El
.
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width Pa -compact
.It Pa /dev/umcpmio0ctl
A control device for the chip instance that allows for a number of
IOCTLs.
.Pp
.It Pa /dev/umcpmio0GP1
.It Pa /dev/umcpmio0GP2
.It Pa /dev/umcpmio0GP3
Device files that allow access to the ADC or DAC functions of the
associated gpio pin on the \*[MCP2221].
.Pp
.It Pa /dev/umcpmio0EEP
Device file that interacts with the EEPROM on the MCP2210.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr gpio 4 ,
.Xr iic 4 ,
.Xr spi 4 ,
.Xr sysctl 8 ,
.Xr umcpmioctl 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Nx 11.0 .
Support for the MCP2210 was added in
.Nx 12.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Brad Spencer Aq Mt brad@anduin.eldar.org .
.Sh BUGS
The gpio pins on the these two chips are very slow and one should
not expect to be able to rapidly change their state.
Even if the problem mentioned below did not exist, one should not
expect to be able to use any of the gpio bit banger drivers such as
.Xr gpioiic 4
or
.Xr gpioow 4 .
.Pp
The interrupt function of the \*[MCP2221] on GP1 cannot
currently be used because it is currently not possible to attach
through the driver.
There may be two possible problems going on:
.Bl -bullet
.It
The
.Xr gpio 4
framework runs at
.Dv IPL_VM
with a spin lock and when it attempts to establish an interrupt that
uses the gpio from
.Nm ,
calls are made into the USB stack that will want to wait in a way that
is not allowed while holding a spin lock.
.
.It
.Xr autoconf 9
runs with
.Dv KERNEL_LOCK
and during the attachment, this lock is held when calls are made into
the USB stack that will cause a wait that is not allowed while holding
.Dv KERNEL_LOCK .
.El
.
.Pp
Either or both of these may be
going on, but the end result is that the kernel will panic while
attempting to perform a USB transfer while another driver is
attempting to attach through
.Nm .
.Pp
Likewise, a
.Ql \|gpioctl gpio1 attach ...\|
type call will also panic for the same reason.
.Pp
The end result is that
.Xr gpioirq 4 ,
.Xr gpiopps 4
and
.Xr gpioow 4
will not work with the gpio from
.Nm .
.Pp
Please note that the
.Nm
driver itself can use the USB stack during attachment and there does
not appear to be any problems using the GPIO pins or setting GPIO pin
configurations.
It is only when the driver is a target during another driver's
attachment that there is a problem.
.Pp
The ability to set or change values in most of the chip's FLASH memory
is not supported.
This includes changing the configuration protection password.
Likewise, support for entering the configuration protection password
does not exist, should a particular chip have password protection
enabled.
.Pp
On the MCP2210, changing any pin from INPUT or OUTPUT to ALTx or vise
versa has to rewrite some of the setting for all pins.
A consequence of doing this is that for a very brief time, the default
direction and values will be set on all pins.
This has the biggest impact on OUTPUT pins which might generate a
small pulse.
This behavior really can't be avoided as there is no way with the
MCP2210 to write the configuration of just one pin at a time.
For this same reason, the IRQ event counter will be reset if any pin
switches from INPUT or OUTPUT to ALTx or vise versa.
.Pp
The MCP2210 supports active high or active low CS signals per CS.
However, the
.Xr spi 4
framework does not have any way to specify the direction of the CS
signal, so the only SPI CS signal supported is the usual active low
signal.
