.\"	$NetBSD: veritefb.4,v 1.1 2026/07/11 21:20:12 nia Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2026 The NetBSD Foundation, Inc
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING,
.\" BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED
.\" AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY,
.\" OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd July 11, 2026
.Dt VERITEFB 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm veritefb
.Nd Rendition Verite V2100/V2200 framebuffer driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "veritefb* at pci?"
.Cd "wsdisplay* at veritefb?"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for Rendition Verite V2100/V2200-based PCI and AGP
cards.
These are 2D/3D video cards based on a MIPS-like RISC ASIC with a
fixed-function pixel engine.
.Pp
.Nm
provides an unaccelerated 2D console until the root file system is mounted
and the firmware file
.Pa v20002d.uc
becomes available.
After this, 2D acceleration is enabled via the
.Xr rasops 9
framework.
.Pp
During initialization,
.Nm
attempts to detect the characteristics of the display using DDC/EDID
information.
If this fails, it falls back to a preset VGA (640x480) video mode
at 60Hz.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr genfb 4 ,
.Xr pci 4 ,
.Xr wsdisplay 4
.Rs
.%A Rendition, Inc.
.%T V2200 Integrated 3D/2D/Video Accelerator Technical Specifications
.%D "January 1998"
.Re
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Nx 12.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Radoslaw Kujawa .
.Sh CAVEATS
The microcode required to use these cards with 2D acceleration has
unclear distribution terms and must be obtained separately.
.Sh BUGS
V1000-based cards are not supported.
.Pp
Currently, the driver is limited to 8-bit color depth.
